The Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of Babylon, From the Foundation
of the Monarchy to the Persian Conquest, by Leonard William King

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A History of Babylon, From the Foundation of the Monarchy to the Persian Conquest
       History of Babylonia vol. 2

Author: Leonard William King

Release Date: March 2, 2018 [EBook #56667]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF BABYLON, VOL 2 ***




Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by the Internet Archive.)





A HISTORY

OF BABYLONIA

FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE MONARCHY
TO THE PERSIAN CONQUEST

BY

LEONARD W. KING, LITT.D., F.S.A.

Assistant Keeper of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum
Professor of Assyrian and Babylonian Archæology in
the University of London

WITH MAP, PLANS, AND ILLUSTRATIONS

LONDON

1915




PREFACE


In the first volume of this work an account was given of the early
races of Babylonia from prehistoric times to the foundation of the
monarchy. It closed at the point when the city of Babylon was about
to secure the permanent leadership under her dynasty of West-Semitic
kings. The present volume describes the fortunes of Babylonia during
the whole of the dynastic period, and it completes the history of
the southern kingdom. Last autumn, in consequence of the war, it
was decided to postpone its publication; but, at the request of the
publishers, I have now finished it and seen it through the press. At
a time when British troops are in occupation of Southern Mesopotamia,
the appearance of a work upon its earlier history may perhaps not be
considered altogether inopportune.

Thanks to recent excavation Babylon has ceased to be an abstraction,
and we are now able to reconstitute the main features of one of the
most famous cities of the ancient world. Unlike Ashur and Nineveh, the
great capitals of Assyria, Babylon survived with but little change
under the Achæmenian kings of Persia, and from the time of Herodotus
onward we possess accounts of her magnificence, which recent research
has in great part substantiated. It is true that we must modify the
description Herodotus has left us of her size, but on all other points
the accuracy of his information is confirmed. The Lion Frieze of the
Citadel and the enamelled beasts of the Ishtar Gate enable us to
understand something of the spell she cast. It is claimed that the
site has been identified of her most famous building, the Hanging
Gardens of the royal palace; and, if that should prove to be the case,
they can hardly be said to have justified their reputation. Far more
impressive is the Tower of Babel with its huge Peribolos, enclosing
what has been aptly described as the Vatican of Babylon.

The majority of the buildings uncovered date from the Neo-Babylonian
period, but they may be regarded as typical of Babylonian civilization
as a whole. For temples were rebuilt again and again on the old lines,
and religious conservatism retained the mud-brick walls and primitive
decoration of earlier periods. Even Nabopolassar's royal palace must
have borne a close resemblance to that of Hammurabi; and the street
network of the city appears to have descended without much change from
the time of the First Dynasty. The system which Hammurabi introduced
into the legislation of his country may perhaps have been reflected in
the earliest attempt at town-planning on a scientific basis. The most
striking fact about Babylon's history is the continuity of her culture
during the whole of the dynastic period. The principal modification
which took place was in the system of land-tenure, the primitive
custom of tribal or collective proprietorship giving place to private
ownership under the policy of purchase and annexation deliberately
pursued by the West-Semitic and Kassite conquerors. A parallel to
the earlier system and its long survival may be seen in the village
communities of India at the present day.

In contrast to that of Assyria, the history of Babylon is more
concerned with the development and spread of a civilization than with
the military achievements of a race. Her greatest period of power was
under her first line of kings; and in after ages her foreign policy was
dictated solely by her commercial needs. The letters from Boghaz Keui,
like those from Tell el-Amarna, suggest that, in keeping her trade
connexions open, she relied upon diplomacy in preference to force.
That she could fight at need is proved by her long struggle with the
northern kingdom, but in the later period her troops were never a match
for the trained legions of Assyria. It is possible that Nabopolassar
and his son owed their empire in great measure to the protecting arm of
Media; and Nebuchadnezzar's success at Carchemish does not prove that
the Babylonian character had suddenly changed. A recently recovered
letter throws light on the unsatisfactory state of at least one section
of the army during Nebuchadnezzar's later years, and incidentally it
suggests that Gobryas, who facilitated the Persian occupation, may be
identified with a Babylonian general of that name. With the fall of
Media, he may perhaps have despaired of any successful opposition on
his country's part.

Babylon's great wealth, due to her soil and semi-tropical climate,
enabled her to survive successive foreign dominations and to impose her
civilization on her conquerors. Her caravans carried that civilization
far afield, and one of the most fascinating problems of her history
is to trace the effect of such intercourse in the literary remains of
other nations. Much recent research has been devoted to this subject,
and the great value of its results has given rise in some quarters to
the view that the religious development of Western Asia, and in a minor
degree of Europe, was dominated by the influence of Babylon. The theory
which underlies such speculation assumes a reading of the country's
history which cannot be ignored. In the concluding chapter an estimate
has been attempted of the extent to which the assumption is in harmony
with historical research.

The delay in the publication of this volume has rendered it possible
to incorporate recent discoveries, some of which have not as yet
appeared in print. Professor A. T. Clay has been fortunate enough
to acquire for the Yale University Collection a complete list of
the early kings of Larsa, in addition to other documents with an
important bearing on the history of Babylon. He is at present preparing
the texts for publication, and has meanwhile very kindly sent me
transcripts of the pertinent material with full permission to make use
of them. The information afforded as to the overlapping of additional
dynasties with the First Dynasty of Babylon has thrown new light on
the circumstances which led to the rise of Babylon to power. But these
and other recent discoveries, in their general effect, do not involve
any drastic changes in the chronological scheme as a whole. They lead
rather to local rearrangements, which to a great extent counterbalance
one another. Under Babylon's later dynasties her history and that of
Assyria are so closely inter-related that it is difficult to isolate
the southern kingdom. An attempt has been made to indicate broadly
the chief phases of the conflict, and the manner in which Babylonian
interests alone were affected. In order to avoid needless repetition, a
fuller treatment of the period is postponed to the third volume of this
work. A combined account will then also be given of the literature and
civilization of both countries.

I take this opportunity of expressing my thanks to Monsieur F.
Thureau-Dangin, Conservateur-adjoint of the Museums of the Louvre, for
allowing me last spring to study unpublished historical material in his
charge. The information he placed at my disposal I found most useful
during subsequent work in the Ottoman Museum at Constantinople shortly
before the war. Reference has already been made to my indebtedness
to Professor Clay, who has furnished me from time to time with other
unpublished material, for which detailed acknowledgment is made in the
course of this work. With Professor C. F. Burney I have discussed many
of the problems connected with the influence of Babylon upon Hebrew
literature; and I am indebted to Professor A. C. Headlam for permission
to reprint portions of an article on that subject, which I contributed
in 1912 to the _Church Quarterly Review._

To Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge my thanks are due, as he suggested that I
should write these histories, and he has given me the benefit of his
advice. To him, as to Sir Frederic Kenyon and Mr. D. G. Hogarth, I
am indebted for permission to make use of illustrations, which have
appeared in official publications of the British Museum. My thanks
are also due to Monsieur Ernest Leroux of Paris for allowing me to
reproduce some of the plates from the "Mémoires de la Délégation en
Perse," published by him under the editorship of Monsieur J. de Morgan;
and to the Council and Secretary of the Society of Biblical Archæology
for the loan of a block employed to illustrate a paper I contributed to
their Proceedings. The greater number of the plates illustrating the
excavations are from photographs taken on the spot; and the plans and
drawings figured in the text are the work of Mr. E. J. Lambert and Mr.
C. O. Waterhouse, who have spared no pains to ensure their accuracy.
The designs upon the cover of this volume represent the two most
prominent figures in Babylonian tradition. In the panel on the face of
the cover the national hero Gilgamesh is portrayed, whose epic reflects
the Babylonian heroic ideal. The panel on the back of the binding
contains a figure of Marduk, the city-god of Babylon, grasping in his
right hand the flaming sword with which he severed the dragon of chaos.

L. W. KING.




CONTENTS

    CHAPTER I

    INTRODUCTORY: BABYLON'S PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY


    Babylon as a centre of civilization--Illustrations
    of foreign influence--Babylon's share in the origin
    of the culture she distributed--Causes which led to
    her rise as capital--Advantages of her geographical
    position--Transcontinental lines of traffic--The Euphrates
    route, the Royal Road, and the Gates of Zagros--Her
    supremacy based on the strategic and commercial qualities
    of her site--The political centre of gravity in Babylonia
    illustrated by the later capitals, Seleucia, Ctesiphon,
    and Baghdad--The Persian Gulf as barrier, and as channel
    of international commerce--Navigation on the Euphrates and
    the Tigris--Causes of Babylon's deposition--Her treatment
    by Cyrus, Alexander, and Seleucus--The Arab conquest of
    Mesopotamia instructive for comparison with the era of
    early city-states--Effect of slackening of international
    communications--Effect of restoration of commercial
    intercourse with the West--Three main periods of Babylon's
    foreign influence--Extent to which she moulded the cultural
    development of other races-Traces of contact in Hebrew
    religion and in Greek mythology--Recent speculation on the
    subject to be tested by the study of history

    CHAPTER II

    THE CITY OF BABYLON AND ITS REMAINS: A DISCUSSION OF THE
    RECENT EXCAVATIONS

    The site of Babylon in popular tradition--Observations of
    Benjamin of Tudela and John Eldred--Exaggerations of early
    travellers--The description of Herodotus--Modern survey and
    excavation--Characteristics of Babylonian architecture--The
    architect's ideal--Comparison of Babylonian and Assyrian
    architectural design--Difficulties of Babylonian
    excavation--The extent of Babylon and the classical
    tradition--Remains of the ancient city--The Walls of
    Babylon--The Outer City-wall--The Mound Bâbil--The Ḳaṣr--The
    Inner City-wall--Imgur-Bêl and Nimitti-Bêl--Quay-walls and
    fortifications--Nebuchadnezzar's river-fortification--Change
    in the course of the Euphrates--Palaces of Nabopolassar
    and Nebuchadnezzar--The official courts of the
    palace--Al-Bît-shar-Bâbili--The Throne-Room and its
    enamelled façade--The private palace and the women's
    apartments--The Hanging Gardens of Babylon--The Ishtar Gate
    and its Bulls and Dragons--Later defences of the Southern
    Citadel--The Lion Frieze--The Procession Street--Temples
    of Babylon--E-makh, the temple of Ninmakh--Altars in the
    Babylonian and Hebrew cults--The unidentified temple--The
    temple of Ishtar of Akkad--Religious mural decoration--The
    temple of Ninib--E-sagila and the Tower of Babylon--The
    Peribolos or Sacred Precincts--E-zida and the Temple-tower
    of Borsippa--The Euphrates bridge--Merkes and the street
    net-work of Babylon--Strata of different periods--Early
    Babylonian town-planning--Material influence of the
    West-Semitic Dynasty--Continuity of Babylonian culture

    CHAPTER III

    THE DYNASTIES OF BABYLON: THE CHRONOLOGICAL SCHEME IN THE
    LIGHT OF RECENT DISCOVERIES

    Chronology the skeleton of history--Principal defect
    in the Babylonian scheme--The Dynasties of Nîsin,
    Larsa and Babylon--Discovery of a List of the kings of
    Larsa--Introduction of fresh uncertainty--Relationship
    of the kings of Babylon and Nîsin--Absence of
    synchronisms--Evidence of date-formula?.--A fresh and
    sounder line of research--Double-dates supply the missing
    link for the chronology--The Nîsin era--Explanation of the
    double-dates--The problem of Rîm-Sin--Method of reconciling
    data--Another line of evidence--Archæological research and
    the Second Dynasty of the Kings' List--Date-formulæ of
    Hammurabi, Samsu-iluna and Iluma-ilum--Methods of fixing
    period of First Dynasty--Ammi-zaduga's omens from the planet
    Venus--Combinations of Venus, sun, and moon--Possibility of
    fixing period of observations--Alternative dates in their
    relation to historical results--The time of harvest in
    farming-out contracts of the period--Probable date for the
    First Dynasty--Re-examination of chronological notices in
    later texts--The Dynasties of Berossus and the beginning of
    his historical period--Effect of recent discoveries on the
    chronological scheme as a whole--Our new picture of the rise
    of Babylon

    CHAPTER IV

    THE WESTERN SEMITES AND THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BABYLON

    Original home of the Amurru, or Western Semites--Arabia
    one of the main breeding-grounds of the human race--The
    great Semitic migrations and their cause--Evidence
    of diminution of rainfall in Arabia--The life of the
    pastoral nomad conditioned by the desert--The change
    from pastoral to agricultural life--Successive stages of
    Canaanite civilization--The neolithic inhabitants and
    the Amorite migration--Canaanites of history and their
    culture--Eastern Syria and the middle Euphrates--Recent
    excavations at Carchemish and its neighbourhood--Early
    Babylonian cylinder-seals on the Sajûr--Trade of Carchemish
    with Northern Babylonia--West Semitic settlements on
    the Khâbûr--The kingdom of Khana--The Amorite invasion
    of Babylonia--The Dynasties of Nîsin and Larsa--Recent
    discoveries at Ashur--Proto-Mitannians--The Western
    Semites in Babylon and their conflict with Assyria--Early
    struggles and methods of expansion--The Elamite conquest
    of Larsa--The three-cornered contest of Nîsin, Elam and
    Babylon--The fall of Nîsin and the duel between Babylon and
    Elam--Hammurabi's defeat of Rîm-Sin and the annexation of
    Sumer by Babylon--Extent of Hammurabi's empire--Hammurabi
    the founder of Babylon's greatness--His work as law-giver
    and administrator

    CHAPTER V

    THE AGE OF HAMMURABI AND ITS INFLUENCE ON LATER PERIODS

    The energy of the Western Semite and his perpetuation of a
    dying culture--His age one of transition--Contemporaneous
    evidence on social and political conditions--The three
    grades in the social scale of Babylon--The nobles a
    racial aristocracy--Origin and rights of the middle
    class--Condition of slaves--Pastoral and agricultural
    life in early Babylonia--Regulations sanction
    long-established custom--The _corvée_ for public
    works--Canals and fishing-rights--Methods of irrigation
    and their modern equivalents--Survival of the Babylonian
    plough and grain-drill--Importance of the date-palm
    and encouragement of plantations--Methods of transport
    by water--The commercial activities of Babylon and the
    larger cities--Partnerships for foreign trade--Life in the
    towns--Family life in early Babylonia--The position of
    women--Privileges enjoyed by votaries--The administration
    of justice--Relation of the crown and the priestly
    hierarchy under the Western Semites--The royal regulation
    of the calendar and the naming of the year--System of
    administration--Changes in the religious sphere and
    revision of the pantheon--Literary activity--The complete
    semitization of the country unaccompanied by any break in
    culture--Babylon's later civilization moulded by Hammurabi's
    age

    CHAPTER VI

    THE CLOSE OF THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BABYLON AND THE KINGS FROM
    THE COUNTRY OF THE SEA

    Condition of the empire on Samsu-iluna's accession--Early
    Kassite raid the signal for revolt, assisted by Elamite
    invasion--Resources of Babylon strained in suppressing
    the rebellion--Rise of an independent kingdom in the
    Sea-Country on the littoral of the Persian Gulf--Capacity
    of the Sea-Country for defence and as a base for offensive
    operations--Sumerian elements in its population--Babylon's
    loss of territory and her struggle with the Sea-Country
    kings--Symptoms of decadence under the later West-Semitic
    kings of Babylon--The deification of royalty and increased
    luxury of ritual--Evidence of Babylon's growing wealth
    and artistic progress under foreign influence--Temporary
    restoration of Babylon's power under Ammi-ditana--Renewed
    activity of the Sea-Country followed by gradual decline of
    Babylon--The close of the West-Semitic dynasty brought about
    or hastened by Hittite invasion--Period of local dynasties
    following the fall of Babylon--Continued succession of the
    Sea-Country kings

    CHAPTER VII

    THE KASSITE DYNASTY AND ITS RELATIONS WITH EGYPT AND THE
    HITTITE EMPIRE

    The Kassite conquest of Babylonia--The Kassites
    probably Aryans by race and akin to the later rulers
    of Mitanni--Character of their rule in Babylon--Their
    introduction of the horse into Western Asia--The
    Kassite conquest of the Sea-Country and its annexation
    to Babylon--Gap in our knowledge of the Kassite
    succession--The letters from Tell el-Amarna and
    Boghaz-Keui--Egypt and Western Asia at the close of
    the fifteenth century--Diplomacy and the balance of
    power--Dynastic marriages and international intercourse of
    the period--Amen-hetep III. and Kadashman-Enlil--Akhenaten
    and his policy of doles--Babylon's caravans in Syria--The
    correspondence of Burna-Buriash and Akhenaten--Egypt's
    loss of her Asiatic provinces--Rise of the Hittite
    Empire--The Hittites and their civilization--Their capital
    of Khatti--Their annexation of Mitanni and the Egyptian
    war--The relations of Khattusil with Kadashman-turgu
    and Kadashman-Enlil II.--Character of the Hittite
    correspondence--The growth of Assyria and her relations
    with Babylon--First phase in the long struggle of the two
    kingdoms--The later members of the Kassite Dynasty--Its
    fall to be traced to Elamite invasion--Economic conditions
    in Babylonia under the Kassites--Kudurru-inscriptions or
    boundary-stones--Their evidence on the Babylonian system of
    land-tenure--Gradual disappearance of tribal proprietorship
    as a result of West-Semitic and Kassite policy--Transition
    from collective to private ownership

    CHAPTER VIII

    THE LATER DYNASTIES AND THE ASSYRIAN DOMINATION

    Spoils at Susa from the Elamite invasion--Recovery
    of her territory by Babylon under Nebuchadnezzar
    I.--Renewal of conflicts and treaties with Assyria--The
    devastation of Babylonia by the Sutû--Ephemeral
    Babylonian dynasties--The state of Sippar typical
    of the condition of the country--Renaissance of
    Assyria--The conquests of Ashur-uasir-pal and Babylon's
    abortive opposition--Babylonian art in the ninth
    century--Intervention of Shalmaneser III. in Babylonian
    politics--His campaign in Chaldea--The kingdom of Urartu
    and its effect on Assyrian expansion--Independence
    of provincial governments during a relaxation of
    central control--Temporary recovery of Babylon under
    Nabonassar--Gradual tightening of Assyria's grasp
    upon the southern kingdom--Character of her later
    empire--Tiglath-pileser IV.'s policy of deportation and its
    inherent weakness--The disappearance of Erartu as a buffer
    state--Sargon and Merodach-baladan--Sennacherib's attempt
    to destroy Babylon--Esarhaddon's reversal of his father's
    policy--The Assyrian conquest of Egypt--Ashur-bani-pal and
    the revolt of Shamash-shum-ukîn--The sack of Susa--Babylon
    under the Sargonids--The policies of encouragement and
    coercion--Effect of their alternation

    CHAPTER IX

    THE NEO-BABYLONIAN EMPIRE AND THE PERSIAN CONQUEST


    Nabopolassar and his nascent kingdom--The Scythian invasion
    and its effects--The sons of Ashur-bani-pal--Nabopolassar
    and the Medes--The fall of Nineveh--Division of Assyrian
    territory--Babylon's conflict with Egypt--Nebuchadnezzar
    II. and the Battle of Carchemish--Capture of Jerusalem
    and deportation of the Jews--Occupation of Phoenicia
    and siege of Tyre--Nebuchadnezzar's later campaign
    in Egypt--Babylon and the Median suzerainty--Lydia
    under the successors of Ardys--Conflict of Cyaxares
    and Alyattes on the Halys and the intervention of
    Babylon--Nebuchadnezzar as builder--Condition of the
    Babylonian army in Nebuchadnezzar's closing years and under
    his successors--Gubaru, the general, and the governor of
    Gutium--Death of Neriglissar--Character of Nabonidus--The
    decaying empire under Median protection--The rise of
    Cyrus--His ease in possessing himself of Media, and the
    probable cause--His defeat and capture of Croesus and
    the fall of Lydia--His advance on Babylon--Possibility
    that Gobryas was a native Babylonian--His motive in
    facilitating the Persian occupation--Defeat and death of
    Belshazzar--Popularity of Cyrus in Babylon--Tranquillity
    of the country under Persian rule--Babylon's last bids for
    independence--Her later history--Survival of Babylonian
    cults into the Christian era

    CHAPTER X

    GREECE, PALESTINE, AND BABYLON: AN ESTIMATE OF CULTURAL
    INFLUENCE

    Influence of Babylon still apparent in the modern world--The
    mother of astronomy, and the survival of her ancient system
    of time-division--The political and religious history of
    the Hebrews in the light of Babylonian research--Echoes
    from Babylonian legends in Greek mythology--The Babylonian
    conception of the universe--The astral theory and its
    comprehensive assumptions--Was Babylonian religion
    essentially a star-worship?--Application of historical
    test--Evolution of the Babylonian god--Origin of divine
    emblems and animal symbolism--World Ages and the astral
    theory--Late evidence and the earlier historical
    periods--The astral ages of the Twins, the Bull and the
    Ram--Suggested influence of each age upon the historical
    literature of antiquity--The Old Testament and the Odyssey
    under astral interpretation--Astronomical defects of the
    astral theory--The age of Babylonian astronomy--Hipparchus
    of Nicæa and the precession of the equinoxes--Hebrews
    and Babylonian astrology--Contrast of the Babylonian and
    Hellenic temperaments--Mesopotamia and the coast-lands of
    Asia Minor--Tales that are told

    APPENDICES

    I. A COMPARATIVE LIST OF THE DYNASTIES OF NISIX, LAKSA, AND
    BABYLON

    II. A DYNASTIC LIST OF THE KINGS OF BABYLON

    INDEX


    LIST OF PLATES

    I. Merodach-baladan II., King of Babylon, making a grant of
    land to Bêl-akhê-erba, governor of Babylon _Frontispiece_

    II. (i) The temple-tower of E-zida at Borsippa. (ii) The
    Lion of Babylon on the Ḳaṣr Mound

    III. The Throne Room in Nebuchadnezzar's palace at Babylon,
    showing the recess in the back wall where the throne once
    stood

    IV. Eastern Towers of the Ishtar Gate, the portions
    preserved having formed the foundation of the final gateway

    V. Trench showing a portion of the Sacred Way of Babylon, to
    the east of the Peribolos

    VI. Two views of the Temple of Ninib in course of excavation

    VII. Brick of Sin-idinnam, King of Larsa, recording the
    cutting of a canal and the restoration of the Temple of the
    Moon-god in the city of Ur

    VIII. Hammurabi, King of Babylon, from a relief in the
    British Museum, dedicated on his behalf to the West Semitic
    goddess [Ash]ratum by Itur-ashdum, a provincial governor

    IX. Brick of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa, recording building
    operations in the city of Ur

    X. The Citadel Mound of Carchemish from the north-west

    XI. Upper portion of the Code of Hammurabi, engraved with
    a scene representing the king receiving his laws from the
    Sun-god

    XII.(i) Bronze cone and votive figure, (ii) Stone cylinder
    with a votive inscription of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa

    XIII. Portion of the text of Hammurabi's Code, Columns 6-8

    XIV. A modern gufa, a form of coracle described by Herodotus
    and represented on the monuments

    XV. (i) A small kelek on the Tigris at Baghdad, (ii)
    Ferry-boats on the Euphrates at Birejik

    XVI. Impressions of Babylonian cylinder-seals, engraved with
    mythological subjects

    XVII. Impressions of Kassite cylinder-seals 198

    XVIII. Brick of Sin-gashid, King of Erech, recording the
    building of his palace in that city 210

    XIX. Head of a colossal statue of Amen-hetep III

    XX. Hittite hieroglyphic inscription at Carchemish

    XXI. Kassite kudurrus, or boundary-stones, set up in the
    reigns of Meli-Shipak II. and Nazi-maruttash

    XXII. Divine emblems on the upper part of akudurru, or
    boundary-stone, engraved with a charter of privileges
    granted by Nebuchadnezzar I

    XXIII. Memorial-tablet of Nabû-aplu-iddina, King of Babylon,
    recording his restoration of the Sun-temple at Sippar

    XXIV. Shalmaneser III. receiving the submission of the
    Chaldeans, from the bronze sheathing of his Gates in the
    British Museum

    XXV. Ashur-bani-pal, represented carrying a builder's
    basket, as the restorer of E-sagila, the temple of Marduk at
    Babylon

    XXVI. Bronze door-step from E-zida, the temple of Nabû
    at Borsippa, inscribed with the name and titles of
    Nebuchadnezzar II.

    XXVII. (i) Baked clay foundation-cylinder of Nabonidus,
    referring to the defeat of Astyages by Cyrus, (ii) Baked
    clay foundation-cylinder of Cyrus, recording his entry into
    Babylon "without battle and without fighting"

    XXVIII. Impressions of Neo-Babylonian and Persian
    cylinder-seals

    XXIX. Limestone statue of the god Nabû at Nimrûd

    XXX. Divine emblems sculptured on the lower portion of the
    boundary-stone engraved with a charter of Nebuchadnezzar
    I.(cp. Plate XXII.)

    XXXI. Two views of a clay model of a sheep's liver with the
    surface divided up and labelled for purposes of divination

    XXXII. A Neo-Babylonian treatise on astronomy, inscribed
    with classified lists of the principal stars and
    constellations, heliacal risings and settings, culminations
    in the south, etc.


    ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT

    1. Diagram to illustrate the political centre of gravity in
    Babylonia

    2. Map of the neighbourhood of Babylon and Birs-Nimrûd;
    after the India Office Map

    3. Plan of the ruins of Babylon; after Koldewey and Andrae

    4. Ground-plan of part of the outer city-wall; after
    Koldewey and Andrae

    5. Conjectural restoration of the Southern Citadel; after
    Andrae

    6. Plan of the Southern Citadel; after Koldewey, Reuther,
    and Wetzel

    7. Ground-plan of quay-walls and fortification-walls in the
    north-west corner of the Southern Citadel; after Koldewey

    8. Section of the quay-walls and fortification-walls along
    the north front of the Southern Citadel; after Andrae

    9. Plan of the Throne Room of Nebuchadnezzar II. and part of
    the private palace; after Koldewey

    10. Design in enamelled brick from the façade of the Throne
    Room

    11. Plan of the north-east corner of the palace with the
    Vaulted Building; after Koldewey

    12. Bull in enamelled brick from the Ishtar Gate

    13. Dragon in enamelled brick from the Ishtar Gate

    14. Ground-plan of the Ishtar Gate; after Koldewey

    15. Section of the Ishtar Gate; after Andrae

    16. Diagram to show the arrangement of the beasts of the
    Ishtar Gate; after Koldewey

    17. Enamelled fragment of the Ishtar Gate still in position

    18. Plan of the later defences of the Citadel upon the
    north, showing the walls with the Lion Frieze and the Ishtar
    Gate

    19. Lion from the frieze of the Sacred Way to the north of
    the Ishtar Gate

    20. Ground-plan of E-makh, the temple of the goddess
    Ninmakh; after Andrae

    21. Conjectural restoration of E-makh; after Andrae

    22. Gold plaque, with architectural design, from a
    Neo-Babylonian burial; enlargement after photo, by Koldewey

    23. Ground-plan of the unidentified temple known as "Z";
    after Andrae

    24. Conjectural restoration of the unidentified temple known
    as "Z"; after Andrae and Koldewey

    25. Ground-plan of the temple of Ishtar of Akkad; after
    Reuther

    20. Ground-plan of the temple of Ninib; after Andrae

    27. Ground-plan of E-temen-anki and E-sagila; after Wetzel

    28. Conjectural reconstruction of E-temen-anki and E-sagila;
    after Andrae

    29. Ground-plan of E-zida and the temple-tower of Nabû at
    Borsippa; after Koldewey

    30. Rough engraving of a temple-tower upon a boundary-stone

    31. Plan of the Merkes Mound, showing part of the street
    network of Babylon; after Koldewey

    32-33. Arabs of the seventh century B.C., from a sculpture
    in the Nineveh Gallery of the British Museum

    34. Head of an archaic limestone figure from Ashur

    35-30. Heads of archaic figures from Ashur and Tello

    37-39. Examples of archaic sculpture from Ashur and Tello,
    exhibiting the same convention in the treatment of woollen
    garments

    40. The Old Babylonian form of plough in use; after Clay

    41. Assyrian kelek on the Tigris; after La yard

    42. The Assyrian prototype of the gufa; from a bas-relief in
    the British Museum

    43. Assyrian raft of logs on the Tigris; from a bas-relief
    in the British Museum

    44. Swamp in Southern Babylonia, or the Sea-Country; after a
    bas-relief at Nineveh

    45. The zebu or humped oxen of the Sea-Country; after a
    bas-relief from Nineveh in the British Museum

    40. Akhenaten, with his queen and infant daughters, on the
    balcony of their palace; after N. de G. Davies

    47-48. Representations of Hittites in Egyptian sculpture;
    after Meyer

    49. Hittite foot-soldiers at the Battle of Kadesh; after
    Meyer

    50. Hittite chieftain, a captive of Rameses III.; after Meyer

    51. Figure, probably of a Hittite king, from the Royal Gate
    at Khatti; after a photo, by Puchstein

    52. The Royal Gate of Khatti, the capital of the Hittites,
    viewed from the outside; after Puchstein

    53. Conjectural restoration of a Hittite gateway viewed from
    outside; after Puchstein

    54. Longitudinal section of the Lower Western Gateway at
    Khatti; after Puchstein

    55. Transverse section of the Lower Western Gateway at
    Khatti; after Puchstein

    56. One of the two sacred boats of Khonsu, the Egyptian
    Moongod, who journeyed into Cappadocia to cast out a devil
    from a Hittite princess; after Rosellini

    57. Rameses II. offering incense to one of the boats of
    Khonsu before he started on his journey; after Rosellini

    58. Scene representing Nabû-mukîn-apli sanctioning a
    transfer of landed property

    59. Marduk and his dragon from a votive offering of
    Marduk-zakir-shum; after Weissbach

    60. The Assyrian army in Chaldea, 851 B.C.; from the Gates
    of Shalmaneser in the British Museum

    61. A Chaldean town of the ninth century B.C.; from the
    Gates of Shalmaneser

    62-63. The tribute of the Chaldeans; from the Gates of
    Shalmaneser

    64. Bas-relief of Shamash-rêsh-usur, governor of the lands
    of Sukhi and Mari; after a photo, by Weissbach

    65. The god Adad from a votive offering dedicated in
    E-sagila by Esarhaddon; after Weissbach

    66-68. The weather-god and two goddesses from an Assyrian
    bas-relief; after Layard

    69. Figure of deity in portable shrine; after Layard

    70. Sumerian harp, with the sound-case surmounted by the
    figure of a bull

    71. The guardian lions of the Eastern Gate of Heaven, from
    the impression of a cylinder-seal in the Louvre; after Heuzey

    72. Winged monster on enamelled frieze at Persepolis; after
    Dieulafoy


    MAPS AND PLANS

    I. Diagram to illustrate the political centre of gravity in
    Babylonia (Fig. 1)

    II. Map of the neighbourhood of Babylon and Birs-Nimrûd
    (Fig. 2)

    III. Plan of the ruins of Babylon (Fig. 3)

    IV. Ground-plan of part of the outer city-wall (Fig. 4)

    V. Plan of the Southern Citadel (Fig. 6)

    VI. Ground-plan of quay-walls and fortification-walls in the
    N.W. corner of the S. Citadel (Fig. 7)

    VII. Plan of the Throne Room of Nebuchadnezzar and part of
    the private palace (Fig. 9)

    VIII. Plan of the N.E. corner of the palace with the Vaulted
    Building (Fig. 11)

    IX. Ground-plan of the Ishtar Gate (Fig. 14)

    X. Plan of the later defences of the Citadel upon the N.,
    showing the walls with the Lion Frieze and the Ishtar Gate
    (Fig. 18)

    XI. Ground-plan of E-makh, the temple of the goddess Ninmakh
    (Fig. 20)

    XII. Ground-plan of the unidentified temple known as "Z"
    (Fig. 23)

    XIII. Ground-plan of the temple of Ishtar of Akkad (Fig. 25)

    XIV. Ground-plan of the temple of Ninib (Fig. 20)

    XV. Ground-plan of E-temen-anki and E-sagila (Fig. 27)

    XVI. Ground-plan of E-zida and the temple-tower of Nabii at
    Borsippa (Fig. 29)

    XVII. Plan of the Merkes Mound, showing part of the street
    network of Babylon (Fig. 31)

    XVIII. Map of Babylonia, Assyria and Mesopotamia. Inset: Map
    of Western Asia




A HISTORY OF BABYLON




CHAPTER I


INTRODUCTORY: BABYLON'S PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY


The name of Babylon suggests one of the great centres from which
civilization radiated to other peoples of the ancient world. And it
is true that from the second millennium onwards we have evidence of
the gradual spread of Babylonian culture throughout the greater part
of Western Asia. Before the close of the fifteenth century, to cite a
single example of such influence, we find that Babylonian had become
the language of Eastern diplomacy. It is not surprising perhaps that
the Egyptian king should have adopted the Babylonian tongue and method
of writing for his correspondence with rulers of Babylon itself or
of Assyria. But it is remarkable that he should employ this foreign
script and language for sending orders to the governors of his Syrian
and Palestinian dependencies, and that such Canaanite officials
should use the same medium for the reports they despatched to their
Egyptian master. In the same period we find the Aryan rulers of
Mitanni, in Northern Mesopotamia, writing in cuneiform the language of
their adopted country. A few decades later the Hittites of Anatolia,
discarding their old and clumsy system of hieroglyphs except for
monumental purposes, borrow the same character for their own speech,
while their treaties with Egypt are drawn up in Babylonian. In the
ninth century the powerful race of the Urartians, settled in the
mountains of Armenia around the shores of Lake Van, adopt as their
national script the writing of Assyria, which in turn had been derived
from Babylon. Elam, Babylon's nearest foreign neighbour, at a very
early period had, like the Hittites of a later age, substituted for
their rude hieroglyphs the language and older characters of Babylon,
and later on they evolved from the same writing a character of their
own. Finally, coming down to the sixth century, we find the Achæmenian
kings inventing a cuneiform sign-list to express the Old Persian
language, in order that their own speech might be represented in royal
proclamations and memorials beside those of their subject provinces of
Babylon and Susiania.

These illustrations of Babylonian influence on foreign races are
confined to one department of culture only, the language and the system
of writing. But they have a very much wider implication. For when
a foreign language is used and written, a certain knowledge of its
literature must be presupposed. And since all early literatures were
largely religious in character, the study of the language carries with
it some acquaintance with the legends, mythology and religious beliefs
of the race from whom it was borrowed. Thus, even if we leave out of
account the obvious effects of commercial intercourse, the single group
of examples quoted necessarily implies a strong cultural influence on
contemporary races.

It may thus appear a paradox to assert that the civilization, with
which the name of Babylon is associated, was not Babylonian. But it is
a fact that for more than a thousand years before the appearance of
that city as a great centre of culture, the civilization it handed on
to others had acquired in all essentials its later type. In artistic
excellence, indeed, a standard had been already reached, which, so far
from being surpassed, was never afterwards attained in Mesopotamia.
And although the Babylonian may justly be credited with greater system
in his legislation, with an extended literature, and perhaps also with
an increased luxury of ritual, his efforts were entirely controlled
by earlier models. If we except the spheres of poetry and ethics, the
Semite in Babylon, as elsewhere, proved himself a clever adapter,
not a creator. He was the prophet of Sumerian culture and merely
perpetuated the achievements of the race whom he displaced politically
and absorbed. It is therefore the more remarkable that his particular
city should have seen but little of the process by which that culture
had been gradually evolved. During those eventful centuries Babylon had
been but little more than a provincial town. Yet it was reserved for
this obscure and unimportant city to absorb within herself the results
of that long process, and to appear to later ages as the original
source of the culture she enjoyed. Before tracing her political
fortunes in detail it will be well to consider briefly the causes which
contributed to her retention of the place she so suddenly secured for
herself.

The fact that under her West-Semitic kings Babylon should have taken
rank as the capital city does not in itself account for her permanent
enjoyment of that position. The earlier history of the lands of
Sumer and Akkad abounds with similar examples of the sudden rise of
cities, followed, after an interval of power, by their equally sudden
relapse into comparative obscurity. The political centre of gravity
was continually shifting from one town to another, and the problem we
have to solve is why, having come to rest in Babylon, it should have
remained there. To the Western Semites themselves, after a political
existence of three centuries, it must have seemed that their city was
about to share the fate of her numerous predecessors. When the Hittite
raiders captured and sacked Babylon and carried off her patron deities,
events must have appeared to be taking their normal course. After the
country, with her abounding fertility, had been given time to recover
from her temporary depression, she might have been expected to emerge
once more, according to precedent, under the aegis of some other
city. Yet it was within the ancient walls of Babylon that the Kassite
conquerors established their headquarters; and it was to Babylon, long
rebuilt and once more powerful, that the Pharaohs of the eighteenth
Dynasty and the Hittite kings of Cappadocia addressed their diplomatic
correspondence. During Assyria's long struggle with the southern
kingdom Babylon was always the protagonist, and no raid by Aramean or
Chaldean tribes ever succeeded in ousting her from that position. At
the height of Assyrian power she continued to be the chief check upon
that empire's expansion, and the vacillating policy of the Sargonids
in their treatment of the city sufficiently testifies to the dominant
_rôle_ she continued to play in politics. And when Nineveh had fallen,
it was Babylon that took her place in a great part of Western Asia.

This continued pre-eminence of a single city is in striking contrast
to the ephemeral authority of earlier capitals, and it can only be
explained by some radical change in the general conditions of the
country. One fact stands out clearly: Babylon's geographical position
must have endowed her during this period with a strategical and
commercial importance which enabled her to survive the rudest shocks
to her material prosperity. A glance at the map will show that the
city lay in the north of Babylonia, just below the confluence of the
two great rivers in their lower course. Built originally on the left
bank of the Euphrates, she was protected by its stream from any sudden
incursion of the desert tribes. At the same time she was in immediate
contact with the broad expanse of alluvial plain to the south-east,
intersected by its network of canals.

But the real strength of her position lay in her near neighbourhood
to the transcontinental routes of traffic. When approaching Baghdad
from the north the Mesopotamian plain contracts to a width of some
thirty-five miles, and, although it has already begun to expand again
in the latitude of Babylon, that city was well within touch of both
rivers. She consequently lay at the meeting-point of two great avenues
of commerce. The Euphrates route linked Babylonia with Northern Syria
and the Mediterranean, and was her natural line of contact with Egypt;
it also connected her with Cappadocia, by way of the Cilician Gates
through the Taurus, along the track of the later Royal Road.[1] Farther
north the trunk-route through Anatolia from the west, reinforced by
tributary routes from the Black Sea, turns at Sivas on the Upper Halys,
and after crossing the Euphrates in the mountains, first strikes the
Tigris at Diarbekr; then leaving that river for the easier plain, it
rejoins the stream in the neighbourhood of Nineveh and so advances
southward to Susa or to Babylon. A third great route that Babylon
controlled was that to the east through the Gates of Zagros, the
easiest point of penetration to the Iranian plateau and the natural
outlet of commerce from Northern Elam.[2] Babylon thus lay across the
stream of the nations' traffic, and in the direct path of any invader
advancing upon the southern plains.

That she owed her importance to her strategic position, and not to any
particular virtue on the part of her inhabitants, will be apparent from
the later history of the country. It has indeed been pointed out that
the geographical conditions render necessary the existence of a great
urban centre near the confluence of the Mesopotamian rivers.[3] And
this fact is amply attested by the relative positions of the capital
cities, which succeeded one another in that region after the supremacy
had passed from Babylon. Seleucia, Ctesiphon and Baghdad are all
clustered in the narrow neck of the Mesopotamian plain, and for only
one short period, when normal conditions were suspended, has the centre
of government been transferred to any southern city.[4] The sole change
has consisted in the permanent selection of the Tigris for the site of
each new capital, with a decided tendency to remove it to the left or
eastern bank.[5] That the Euphrates should have given place in this way
to her sister river was natural enough in view of the latter's deeper
channel and better water way, which gained in significance as soon as
the possibility of maritime communication was contemplated.

Throughout the whole period of Babylon's supremacy the Persian Gulf,
so far from being a channel of international commerce, was as great
a barrier as any mountain range. Doubtless a certain amount of local
coasting traffic was always carried on, and the heavy blocks of diorite
which were brought to Babylonia from Magan by the early Akkadian king
Narâm-Sin, and at a rather later period by Gudea of Lagash,[6] must
have been transported by water rather than over land. Tradition, too,
ascribed the conquest of the island of Dilmun, the modern Bahrein,
to Sargon of Akkad; but that marked the extreme limit of Babylonian
penetration southwards, and the conquest must have been little more
than a temporary occupation following a series of raids down the
Arabian coast. The fact that two thousand years later Sargon of
Assyria, when recording his receipt of tribute from Upêri of Dilmun,
should have been so far out in his estimate of its distance from the
Babylonian coast-line,[7] is an indication of the continued disuse of
the waters of the gulf as a means of communication. On this supposition
we may readily understand the difficulties encountered by Sennacherib
when transporting his army across the head of the gulf against certain
coast-towns of Elam, and the necessity, to which he was put, of
building special ships for the purpose.

There is evidence that in the Neo-Babylonian period the possibilities
of transport by way of the gulf had already begun to attract attention,
and Nebuchadnezzar II. is said to have attempted to build harbours
in the swamp at the mouths of the delta.[8] But his object must have
been confined to encouraging coastal trade, for the sea-route between
the Persian Gulf and India was certainly not in use before the fifth
century, and in all probability was inaugurated by Alexander. According
to Herodotus[9] it had been opened by Darius after the return of the
Greek Scylax of Caryanda from his journey to India, undertaken as one
of the surveying expeditions on the basis of which Darius founded
the assessment of his new satrapies. But, although there is no need
to doubt the historical character of that voyage, there is little
to suggest that Scylax coasted round, or even entered, the Persian
Gulf.[10] Moreover, it is clear that, while Babylon's international
trade received a great impetus under the efficient organization of
the Persian Empire, it was the overland routes which benefited. The
outcrops of rock, or cataracts, which blocked the Tigris for vessels
of deeper draft, were not removed until Alexander levelled them; and
the problem of Babylon's sea-traffic, to which he devoted the closing
months of his life, was undoubtedly one of the factors which, having
now come into prominence for the first time, influenced Seleucus in
selecting a site on the Tigris for his new capital.[11]

But that was not the only cause of Babylon's deposition. For after
her capture by Cyrus, new forces came into play which favoured a
transference of the capital eastward. During the earlier periods of her
history Babylon's chief rival and most persistent enemy had lain upon
her eastern frontier. To the early Sumerian rulers of city-states Elam
had been "the mountain that strikes terror,"[12] and during subsequent
periods the cities of Sumer and Akkad could never be sure of immunity
from invasion in that quarter. We shall see that in Elam the Western
Semites of Babylon found the chief obstacle to the southward extension
of their authority, and that in later periods any symptom of internal
weakness or dissension was the signal for renewed attack. It is true
that the Assyrian danger drew these ancient foes together for a time,
but even the sack of Susa by Ashur-bani-pal did not put an end to their
commercial rivalry.